Chapter 1/
The Punished Suicide as “artistic anatomy”

This section of the essay breaks down the term “artistic anatomy” into its two fundamental components: 
anatomy and art. After the definition of Brunetti’s tannization method, the manufacturing process of 
The Punished Suicide (Fig. 1.) will be explained; and finally, the object will be analysed with art historical approaches.

Brunetti and the tannization method

Lodovico Brunetti (1813–1899) is a prominent figure in the history of anatomy, who greatly contributed to the 
legacy of Padua of being the centre of medical studies.1 Brunetti was internationally acclaimed in his field; 
he was a member of various scientific societies across Europe, and he also received several honorary titles.2 
In 1855, he was appointed as chair of the new Institute of Pathological Anatomy at the University of Padua, 
which he held until 1887.3 With the aim of expanding learning opportunities for students, he established the 
Museum of Pathological Anatomy in Padua in the early 1870s.4 This museum was the stage where his tannization 
experiments unfolded: he enriched the collection with dozens of preparations, one of them being The Punished Suicide. 

Brunetti’s tannization method was appraised for its ability to perfectly maintain the proportions and texture of 
the specimen.5 The process consisted of four steps: “blood and fat removal from the organ by flushing the vessels 
with water; injection of tannic acid into the now cleaned vessels; and drying the organ with hot compressed air.”6 
Brunetti himself divided the development of this method into four periods, the first of which he called “external 
and artistic preparation”, in other words, “artistic anatomy”.7 

Artistic anatomy is a curious term since it has two separate, yet intermingled traditions in the fields of art 
and science. In the field of art, the term originated with Renaissance artists such as Michelangelo and Leonardo, 
who “were doing vastly more dissection and were far more familiar with the structure of the body than were anatomists.”8 
Although these artists utilized their anatomical knowledge for their artistic production, some claim that they can be 
considered the founders of anatomy – especially Leonardo, who “placed art in the service of anatomy”.9 Meanwhile, in 
a medical, anatomical and anatomical-pathological context, artistic anatomy “concerns preparations that have been made 
by combining medical-didactic and aesthetic purposes.”10 This is the category to which The Punished Suicide belongs. 

The making of “La Suicida Punita”

The Punished Suicide is the taxidermy of an eighteen-year-old woman, “who was found drowned on the banks of the river 
that ran beside the rear facade of the Hospital “Giustinianeo” close to the Institute of Pathological Anatomy,.”11 
Her body was sent to Brunetti, who was to perform the autopsy.12 There is a lack of logical reasoning behind the decision 
to experiment on the woman’s corpse after the autopsy had been completed; nevertheless, Brunetti preserved part of the 
corpse in a bust-form in the following way: 
During the autopsy, Brunetti made a plaster cast of the girl’s face and upper bust. After this, he peeled away the skin 
from her face and neck, scoured the flesh with sulfuric ether and then treated it with tannic acid to preserve it from 
putrefaction. He then re-applied the tissue over the plaster cast, to reproduce girl’s features, adding glass eyes and 
plaster ears to complete the taxidermy, covering her shoulders with a light lace fabric.13

However, it was impossible to repair certain gashes on the woman’s skin – especially on the eyelid – which were caused 
by the hooks that were used to recover the body from the water.14 Therefore, Brunetti decided to attach decoration to 
it in order to hide these imperfections. He applied two tree branches with moss to the base of the structure, then placed 
four twisting serpents on them which are positioned in a way that they seem to attack and devour the woman’s face; and 
this is reinforced by the final touch of dripping red wax which resembles blood. The resulting composition is an allegory 
for the punishment that one receives in hell for committing suicide, – as the title suggests – which was a religious dogma 
of the Roman Catholic Church.15 These decorations and the allegorical character are what make The Punished Suicide into an 
“artistic anatomy”, which can further be explored through art historical approaches.

Art historical approaches to The Punished Suicide

To begin with, a somewhat recent method in the field of art history is a material-oriented approach. 
According to this approach, instead of assigning a passive role to materials, they are treated “as active components 
in the conception, production and interpretation of artworks.”1 As proposed by Lehmann, materials – as active components – 
can make meaning through interaction, attribution and comparison; these ways will now be explored in the materials of 
The Punished Suicide to see what meanings they create. Firstly, it is through the interaction between materials that the 
form and subject matter of an artwork is developed.2 In the case of The Punished Suicide, this is most prevalent in the 
interaction between the plaster cast and the skin of the young female: these two materials – long detached from their 
original source, the woman’s face – form such a strong unity, that one has to remind herself that the displayed object is 
not a real person. Secondly, material attributions are associations that humans make in connection with materials – which 
can vary in time or space.3 A powerful attribution in The Punished Suicide is our association of skin, hair, and other bodily 
materials with living organisms. Once these materials are detached from the body, normally the result is an uneasy, distressing 
feeling, which is also true here. Thirdly, comparison is about the transgression of the – physical or metaphysical – boundaries 
between materials.4 The most radical form of comparison is imitation, which is present in The Punished Suicide in the materials 
of wax and glass. The melted red wax is imitating the organic flow of dripping blood, while the glass in place of the eyes is 
mimicking the way in which eyes naturally reflect light. These material comparisons – among others – evoke the presence of a 
real human being, which is what makes the object so shocking. 

Another approach which can help reflect on the artistic quality of The Punished Suicide is the search for artworks which are 
similar in (1) form or (2) content. (1) Firstly, the entire shape of The Punished Suicide is based on the artistic technique 
of life-casting, which can be traced back as far as to the fifth century BC.1 Life-casting represents the third type of sculpture,
in which “the direct physical contact with the model results in the production of forms that are very close to the original ones.”2 
Secondly, this anatomical object perfectly fits into the sculptural tradition of the portrait bust. The form of The Punished Suicide 
resembles early-Renaissance portrait busts most closely, as illustrated by Figure 2. Instead of being rounded at the bottom as 
classical busts, the Renaissance variant is cut horizontally just above the elbows, which also applies to The Punished Suicide. Via 
this format, the Renaissance bust – and similarly, the anatomical bust – emphasizes that it is only a fragment of the whole, in a 
sense it “evokes the complete individual.”3 Lastly, the composition of The Punished Suicide contains elements of the Medusa imagery, 
which is especially evident when compared to Caravaggio’s depiction in Figure 3. The twisting, crawling snakes around Medusa’s head, 
and the blood gushing out from the neck have strong parallels in The Punished Suicide. 
(2) In terms of the content – or iconography – of Brunetti’s creation, its allegorical meaning could not be closer to art history. 
Artistic depictions of hell in all sorts of media have existed since the beginning of Christianity, predominantly in Last Judgement 
scenes. A common feature of such pictures is the presence of monstrous creatures often resembling reptiles, who torture and devour 
the human sinners, which is portrayed in Figure 4 as well. This sentiment is echoed in The Punished Suicide, where the serpents 
attacking the woman’s face represent the suffering which awaits the female in hell. Thus, it could not have been a coincidence that 
in 1865, Brunetti chose The Punished Suicide, along with one more preparation, to be represented in his celebratory manifesto (Figure 5) 
that he sent as an homage to the six hundredth anniversary of the birth of Dante Alighieri (1265–1321).1 The punishment that Brunetti 
envisioned in his creation is reflected in Dante’s Inferno, in which the author pictured the following: “The person who committed suicide 
was condemned to eternal unrest in the forests of self-destruction in the seventh hell, among heretics and murderers.”2