Object: 
It was made in 1863 by Lodovico Brunetti, from the remains of a female who committed suicide. Around this time, 
Brunetti was experimenting with the method of “tannisation” which is how both the female and the snakes around 
her were preserved (by peeling the skin off the specimen and injecting tannic acid into the skin). 

Research question: 
The host museum categorizes this object under “artistic anatomy”. I want to examine how exactly this scientific 
object fits into an art historical context; moreover, how the visitor’s perception could possibly change if it 
was exhibited in an art museum. 

Research approach: 
Firstly, I want to pay close attention to the methods used in the creation of the object which resemble artistic 
practices. The skin of the specimen in mounted on a plaster cast of the female’s head: this fits precisely into the 
artistic practice of life-casting, and also, the fundamental format of the object is that of a portrait bust. 
The choice of adding melted red wax to the object (resembling blood) also reflects artistic considerations, since 
it does not add to the anatomical value of the object at all. The strong allegorical undertone of the object 
(“suicide punished by God”) also fits more into artistic than into scientific traditions. 

Secondly, I want to observe the dynamics of anatomical and art museums (also by using the lecture material), which 
determine the reception of this object. Are the visitors of an anatomical museum supposed to be more “objective” 
than the visitors of an art museum? Would we ethically question this object if it was exhibited in an art museum 
(questions regarding consent)? Besides the fact that it was made with a scientific method, for what other reasons 
is this object displayed in an anatomical museum, does it actually produce scientific knowledge?


Joost's feedback:
Look for visual examples that are close to your object in time and place if you want to place the work in an 
art historical trajectory. Also, don't forget to include a reflection on the current display of the object, 
i.e. object label etc. And then imagine an art historical display with a (possibly) different label.